v6 analyses page (#60)
EBI-Metagenomics/notebooks: src/docs/analysis_v6.md

| [Infernal/cmsearch](https://github.com/EddyRivasLab/infernal) | 1.1.5 | rRNA sequence searching |
| [cmsearch_tblout_deoverlap](https://github.com/nawrockie/cmsearch_tblout_deoverlap) | 0.09 | Deoverlapping of cmsearch results |
| [MAPseq](https://github.com/meringlab/MAPseq) | 2.1.1b | Reference-based taxonomic classification of rRNA |
| [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) | 2.8.1 | Krona chart visualisation |
| [cutadapt](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io) | 4.6 | Primer trimming |
| [R](https://www.r-project.org) | 4.3.3 | R programming language (runs DADA2) |
| [DADA2](https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/index.html) | 1.30.0 | ASV calling |
| [MultiQC](https://github.com/MultiQC/MultiQC) | 1.24.1 | Result aggregation into HTML reports |
| [mgnify-pipelines-toolkit](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-pipelines-toolkit) | 0.1.8 | Toolkit containing various in-house processing scripts |
| [PIMENTO](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/PIMENTO) | 1.0.2 | Primer inference toolkit |

### Reference Databases

The pipeline uses the following reference databases:

| Reference Database | Version | Purpose |
|---|---|---|

> | [SILVA](https://www.arb-silva.de) | 138.1 | 16S+18S+[LSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu) rRNA database |

Reviewer: I'd go either with `16S/18S+23S/28S` or with `SSU+LSU` (like you did for rawR)

| [16S](glossary.md#16s-rrna-genes) | ✓ | ✓ |
| [18S](glossary.md#18s-rrna-genes) | ✓ | ✓ |
| [LSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu) | ✓ | ✗ |
| [ITS](glossary.md#its) | ✓ | ✗ |

### Pipeline Workflow

1. Quality Control: Reads undergo quality filtering using fastp and sanity checking with SeqFu
2. Amplified Region Inference: Automatic identification of amplified regions using PIMENTO
3. Primer Identification and Trimming: Automatic primer detection and removal using cutadapt
4. rRNA Sequence Extraction: Identification of rRNA sequences using Infernal/cmsearch with Rfam models
5. Closed-reference Taxonomic Classification: Taxonomy assignment using MAPseq with SILVA, PR2, UNITE, and ITSoneDB databases
6. ASV Calling: Amplicon Sequence Variant identification using DADA2
7. ASV Taxonomic Classification: Taxonomy assignment for ASVs using MAPseq against SILVA and PR2
8. Visualisation: Interactive taxonomic visualisation using Krona
9. Result Aggregation: Comprehensive reporting with MultiQC

### Results available on MGnify

For each analysed [run](glossary.md#run), MGnify displays and provides downloads for:

- Quality control summaries, including read filtering and primer trimming metrics.

> - Amplified-region and primer-identification summaries for supported 16S and 18S datasets.

Reviewer: Primer validation could go here

- Closed-reference taxonomic profiles for SILVA PR2, UNITE, and ITSoneDB, with interactive Krona visualisations where available.
- ASV sequences, ASV read-count tables, and ASV taxonomic assignments against SILVA and PR2 when ASV analysis is supported for the inferred amplicon.

> Study-level pages aggregate run-level quality-control and primer-validation information where multiple runs are available.

Reviewer: At the study level I can only see taxonomic summaries and DwC-ready summaries...

> 

Reviewer: Should we mention that we provide other files and results on the ftp?

## Raw reads analysis pipeline

> The MGnify v6 raw reads analysis pipeline ([GitHub repository](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/raw-reads-analysis-pipeline)) analyses whole genome sequencing (WGS) reads, profiling their taxonomy and functions. It is designed to handle both short (paired- and single-end) and long reads, taking raw reads rather than assembled contigs or genomes as input.

Reviewer: `taking raw reads rather than assembled contigs or genomes as input` feels a bit tautological since we are talking about the raw reads pipeline :)

> The MGnify v6 raw reads analysis pipeline ([GitHub repository](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/raw-reads-analysis-pipeline)) analyses whole genome sequencing (WGS) reads, profiling their taxonomy and functions. It is designed to handle both short (paired- and single-end) and long reads, taking raw reads rather than assembled contigs or genomes as input.

Reviewer: Does it support metatranscriptomic reads?

### Tools and Databases Used

The raw reads analysis pipeline v6 uses the following tools and databases:

| Tool/Database | Version | Purpose |
|---|---|---|

> | [bbmap](https://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap) | 35.85 | Standardise paired-end FASTQ files |

Reviewer: Reminder to check if versions have changed

| [seqkit](https://github.com/shenwei356/seqkit) | 2.9.0 | Nucleotide-to-amino-acid sequence translation |
| [bwa-mem2](https://github.com/bwa-mem2/bwa-mem2) | 2.2.1 | Short-read mapping to decontamination reference genomes |
| [minimap2](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2) | 2.3.0 | Long-read mapping to decontamination reference genomes |
| [samtools](https://github.com/samtools/samtools) | 1.21 | FASTA/FASTQ filtering for decontamination |
| [infernal](https://github.com/EddyRivasLab/infernal) | 1.1.5 | Read mapping to rRNA covariance models using cmsearch |
| [easel](https://github.com/EddyRivasLab/easel) | 0.49 | Sequence extraction from cmsearch mapping |
| [mapseq](https://github.com/jfmrod/MAPseq) | 2.1.1b | rRNA read mapping to a reference database |
| [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) | 2.8.1 | Interactive taxonomic profile generation |
| [mOTUs](https://github.com/motu-tool/mOTUs) | 3.0.3 | Taxonomic profile generation |
| [HMMER](https://github.com/EddyRivasLab/hmmer) | 3.4 | Read mapping to Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) |
| [MultiQC](https://github.com/MultiQC/MultiQC) | 1.27 | Reports containing quality-control and decontamination information |

> | [Python](https://www.python.org) | 3.11.8 | Functional profile generation |

Reviewer: `Functional profile generation` sounds like a stretch haha

| [mgnify-pipelines-toolkit](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-pipelines-toolkit) | 1.0.4 | Contains mapseq2biom for converting mapseq output |

### Reference Databases

The pipeline uses the following reference databases:

| Reference Database | Version | Purpose |
|---|---|---|
| [mOTUs](https://motu-tool.org) | 3.0.3 | Database for mOTUs tools |
| [Rfam](https://rfam.org) | 15.0 | rRNA covariance models |
| [SILVA](https://www.arb-silva.de) | 138.1 | [LSU and SSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu) rRNA database with taxonomy |
| [Pfam-A](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/entry/pfam) | 38.0 | Protein family Hidden Markov Models |
| [hg38](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_000001405.40/) | GRCh38.p14 | Human reference genome for host decontamination |
| [phiX](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/9626372) | phiX174 | PhiX control sequence removed during decontamination (Illumina only) |

### Pipeline Features

The v6 raw reads analysis pipeline includes the following key features:

- Long Read Support: Handles both short (e.g. Illumina) and long reads (e.g. Oxford Nanopore, PacBio) with platform-appropriate tools

> - Multiple taxonomic profiling methods: 1) mOTUs marker-gene approach, 2) rRNA-based (SILVA) appraoch comparable to Amplicon Analysis Pipeline OTU method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Multiple taxonomic profiling methods: 1) mOTUs marker-gene approach, 2) rRNA-based (SILVA) approach comparable to Amplicon Analysis Pipeline OTU method
```

- Optional subsampling for functional profiling to limit computational expense

> - Flexible Database Management: when multiple reference databases are defined in the nextflow params then they are each used thereby generating multiple sets of results.

Reviewer: A bit clunky...
```suggestion
- Flexible Database Management: when multiple reference databases are defined in the nextflow parameters, each is used to generate its own set of results.
```

| [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) | 2.8.1 | Visualisation of taxonomic analyses |
| [mgnify-pipelines-toolkit](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-pipelines-toolkit) | 1.2.0 | Toolkit containing various in-house processing scripts |
| [minimap2](https://lh3.github.io/minimap2/) | 2.29-r1283 | Assembly decontamination |
| [MultiQC](https://github.com/MultiQC/MultiQC) | 1.29 | Result aggregation into HTML reports |
| [Owltools](https://github.com/owlcollab/owltools) | 2024-06-12 | GO term to GO Slim mapping |
| [Pyrodigal](https://pyrodigal.readthedocs.org) | 3.6.3 | Protein coding sequence prediction |
| [QUAST](http://quast.sourceforge.net/quast) | 5.2.0 | Assembly quality assessment |
| [RHEA](https://www.rhea-db.org) | N/A | Protein reaction assignments |
| [run_dbCAN](https://github.com/bcb-unl/run_dbcan) | 5.1.2 | Carbohydrate-active enzyme annotation |
| [SanntiS](https://github.com/Finn-Lab/SanntiS) | 0.9.4.1 | Biosynthetic gene cluster identification |
| [SeqKit](https://bioinf.shenwei.me/seqkit/) | 2.8.0 | FASTA file manipulation |
| [tabix](http://www.htslib.org/doc/tabix.html) | 1.21 | Indexing compressed annotation files |

> | [UniRef90](https://www.uniprot.org/help/uniref) | 2025_01 | Protein sequence-based taxonomic analysis |

Reviewer: VIRify and MAP?

6. Biosynthetic Gene Cluster Detection: Both antiSMASH and SanntiS are used to identify potential secondary metabolite production pathways.

7. Pathway Analysis: KEGG module completeness is calculated, and Genome Properties are inferred.

8. DRAM Integration: DRAM provides metabolic summaries and visualisations.

9. Output Generation: All annotations are consolidated into standardised output formats.

### Results available on MGnify

For each analysed [assembly](glossary.md#assembly), MGnify displays and provides downloads for:

- Filtered contigs, assembly quality statistics, and quality-control summaries.
- Predicted coding sequences and consolidated GFF3 annotations.
- Taxonomic assignments for contigs, plus rRNA marker gene sequences where detected.
- Functional annotation summaries from InterProScan, Pfam, Gene Ontology, eggNOG-mapper, KEGG, RHEA, and dbCAN.
- Pathway and systems summaries, including KEGG module completeness, Genome Properties, DRAM metabolism summaries, and biosynthetic gene cluster predictions from antiSMASH and SanntiS.

Assembly analysis results are shown alongside linked VIRify and Mobilome annotations where those additional analyses are available.

> ## VIRify

Reviewer: Both VIRify and MAP feel like tools that should be listed within the  assembly analysis, and then referred to as external pipelines...

Reviewer: Probably worth spending a few more words on them since they are ours (like the introductions you wrote), but all the documentation already exists in the respective repos

---
title: Analysis pipeline v6
author:
  - name: MGnify
    url: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metagenomics
    affiliation: EMBL-EBI
    affiliation-url: https://www.ebi.ac.uk
date: last-modified
citation: true
description: Description of the latest MGnify analysis pipeline and the tools it uses.
order: 3
---
## Overview

The latest MGnify analysis service (version 6) offers workflows for three different data types: [amplicon](glossary.md#amplicon), raw [metagenomic](glossary.md#metagenomic)/[metatranscriptomic](glossary.md#metatranscriptomic) reads, and [assembly](glossary.md#assembly).

For assembled datasets, the assembly analysis pipeline is complemented by [VIRify](#virify) for viral sequence detection and the [Mobilome annotation pipeline](#mobilome-annotation-pipeline) for mobile genetic element prediction, both accessible in the same web view.

## Amplicon analysis pipeline

> The MGnify v6 amplicon analysis pipeline ([GitHub repository](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/amplicon-analysis-pipeline)) analyses [amplicon](glossary.md#amplicon) sequencing reads to provide taxonomic profiles from closed-reference databases. For supported [16S](glossary.md#16s-rrna-genes) and [18S](glossary.md#18s-rrna-genes) datasets, it also infers amplified regions, identifies and trims primers, calls [Amplicon Sequence Variants (ASVs)](glossary.md#amplicon-sequence-variant-asv), and assigns taxonomy to those ASVs.

Reviewer 2: it's technically on v6.1 now, but I assume there's no need to really talk about anything other than v6 in this context right?

Reviewer 2: also historically it looks like we've usually used the format v5.0 for referring to pipeline versions: https://docs.mgnify.org/src/docs/analysis.html so v6.0 for this.. do we want to continue that?

Author: yeah, we should continue that. I'll a small section about v6.1 (and the differences)

| [SeqFu](https://github.com/telatin/seqfu2) | 1.20.3 | FASTQ sanity checking |
| [seqtk](https://github.com/lh3/seqtk) | 1.4 | FASTQ file manipulation |
| [SeqKit](https://bioinf.shenwei.me/seqkit/) | 2.9.0 | FASTQ file manipulation |
| [easel](https://github.com/EddyRivasLab/easel) | 0.49 | FASTA file manipulation |
| [bedtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io) | 2.30.0 | FASTA sequence masking |
| [Infernal/cmsearch](https://github.com/EddyRivasLab/infernal) | 1.1.5 | rRNA sequence searching |
| [cmsearch_tblout_deoverlap](https://github.com/nawrockie/cmsearch_tblout_deoverlap) | 0.09 | Deoverlapping of cmsearch results |
| [MAPseq](https://github.com/meringlab/MAPseq) | 2.1.1b | Reference-based taxonomic classification of rRNA |
| [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) | 2.8.1 | Krona chart visualisation |
| [cutadapt](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io) | 4.6 | Primer trimming |
| [R](https://www.r-project.org) | 4.3.3 | R programming language (runs DADA2) |
| [DADA2](https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/index.html) | 1.30.0 | ASV calling |
| [MultiQC](https://github.com/MultiQC/MultiQC) | 1.24.1 | Result aggregation into HTML reports |

> | [mgnify-pipelines-toolkit](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-pipelines-toolkit) | 0.1.8 | Toolkit containing various in-house processing scripts |

Reviewer 2: at least this and PIMENTO versions are outdated... they need to be updated in the AMP repo too

Author: yeah, I drafted this a long time ago. I'll pull the latest versions

| [PIMENTO](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/PIMENTO) | 1.0.2 | Primer inference toolkit |

### Reference Databases

The pipeline uses the following reference databases:

| Reference Database | Version | Purpose |
|---|---|---|
| [SILVA](https://www.arb-silva.de) | 138.1 | 16S+18S+[LSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu) rRNA database |
| [PR2](https://pr2-database.org) | 5.0 | Protist-focused 18S+16S rRNA database |
| [UNITE](https://unite.ut.ee) | 9.0 | [ITS](glossary.md#its) database |
| [ITSoneDB](https://itsonedb.cloud.ba.infn.it) | 1.141 | [ITS](glossary.md#its) database |
| [Rfam](https://rfam.org) | 14.10 | rRNA covariance models |

### Pipeline Features

The v6 amplicon analysis pipeline includes the following key features:

- Read Quality Control: Uses fastp for read filtering and SeqFu for FASTQ sanity checking
- rRNA Sequence Categorisation: Uses Infernal/cmsearch and Rfam models to identify [SSU, LSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu), and [ITS](glossary.md#its) sequences

> - Automatic Amplified Region Inference: Automatically identifies amplified regions for 16S and 18S rRNA using PIMENTO

Reviewer 2: that's incorrect - the amplified region inference is different from what PIMENTO does which is primer inference... the amplified region inference is a big python script, and predicts which region was amplified within 16S or 18S i.e. V1, V3-V4, etc.

Reviewer 2: this is the script in case it helps: https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-pipelines-toolkit/blob/main/mgnify_pipelines_toolkit/analysis/amplicon/classify_var_regions.py

> - Automatic Primer Identification and Trimming: Uses cutadapt for primer handling, with validation via Infernal

Reviewer 2: I would mention PIMENTO here instead for primer trimming. also cutadapt should be capitalised

> - ASV Calling: Identifies Amplicon Sequence Variants (ASVs) using DADA2 for supported amplicons

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ASV Calling: Calls Amplicon Sequence Variants (ASVs) using DADA2 for supported amplicons
```

- Taxonomic Classification: Produces closed-reference and ASV taxonomy assignments using MAPseq and Krona visualisation
- Reference Databases: Uses SILVA, PR2, UNITE, ITSoneDB, and Rfam

### Supported Amplicons

The pipeline supports the following amplicon types:

| Amplicon | Closed-reference analysis | ASV analysis |
|---|---|---|
| [16S](glossary.md#16s-rrna-genes) | ✓ | ✓ |
| [18S](glossary.md#18s-rrna-genes) | ✓ | ✓ |
| [LSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu) | ✓ | ✗ |
| [ITS](glossary.md#its) | ✓ | ✗ |

> ### Pipeline Workflow

Reviewer 2: honestly this section feels pretty redundant, since most of the info is being repeated from the `### Pipeline Features` section

Reviewer: I agree - could we add the image for the pipeline workflow instead?

1. Quality Control: Reads undergo quality filtering using fastp and sanity checking with SeqFu

> 2. Amplified Region Inference: Automatic identification of amplified regions using PIMENTO

Reviewer 2: this should again be changed, PIMENTO is only for primer identification

3. Primer Identification and Trimming: Automatic primer detection and removal using cutadapt
4. rRNA Sequence Extraction: Identification of rRNA sequences using Infernal/cmsearch with Rfam models
5. Closed-reference Taxonomic Classification: Taxonomy assignment using MAPseq with SILVA, PR2, UNITE, and ITSoneDB databases
6. ASV Calling: Amplicon Sequence Variant identification using DADA2
7. ASV Taxonomic Classification: Taxonomy assignment for ASVs using MAPseq against SILVA and PR2
8. Visualisation: Interactive taxonomic visualisation using Krona
9. Result Aggregation: Comprehensive reporting with MultiQC

### Results available on MGnify

For each analysed [run](glossary.md#run), MGnify displays and provides downloads for:

- Quality control summaries, including read filtering and primer trimming metrics.
- Amplified-region and primer-identification summaries for supported 16S and 18S datasets.

> - Closed-reference taxonomic profiles for SILVA-SSU, SILVA-LSU, PR2, UNITE, and ITSoneDB, with interactive Krona visualisations where available.

Reviewer 2: No need to mention both SILVA-SSU and SILVA-LSU here IMO - they're the same reference DB
```suggestion
- Closed-reference taxonomic profiles for SILVA PR2, UNITE, and ITSoneDB, with interactive Krona visualisations where available.
```

> - ASV sequences, ASV read-count tables, and ASV taxonomic assignments against DADA2-SILVA and DADA2-PR2 when ASV analysis is supported for the inferred amplicon.

Reviewer 2: These are just labels, for the documentation just use the refDB name IMO
```suggestion
- ASV sequences, ASV read-count tables, and ASV taxonomic assignments against SILVA and PR2 when ASV analysis is supported for the inferred amplicon.
```

> Study-level pages aggregate run-level quality-control and primer-validation information where multiple runs are available.

Reviewer 2: do we want to mention DwC-ready files here?

Author: Yeah, probably in another section or subpage.

| [cmsearch_tblout_deoverlap](https://github.com/nawrockie/cmsearch_tblout_deoverlap) | 0.09 | Resolution of reads mapping to multiple locations |
| [mgnify-pipelines-toolkit](https://github.com/EBI-Metagenomics/mgnify-pipelines-toolkit) | 1.0.4 | Contains mapseq2biom for converting mapseq output |

### Reference Databases

The pipeline uses the following reference databases:

| Reference Database | Version | Purpose |
|---|---|---|
| [mOTUs](https://motu-tool.org) | 3.0.3 | Database for mOTUs tools |
| [Rfam](https://rfam.org) | 15.0 | rRNA covariance models |
| [SILVA](https://www.arb-silva.de) | 138.1 | [LSU and SSU](glossary.md#lsu-ssu) rRNA database with taxonomy |
| [Pfam-A](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/entry/pfam) | 38.0 | Protein family Hidden Markov Models |
| [hg38](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_000001405.40/) | GRCh38.p14 | Human reference genome for host decontamination |
| [phiX](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/9626372) | phiX174 | PhiX control sequence removed during decontamination (Illumina only) |

### Pipeline Features

The v6 raw reads analysis pipeline includes the following key features:

> - Quality Control: Uses fastp for read quality filtering and BBMap for paired-end standardisation

Reviewer 3: Some of these are covered in the following "Pipeline workflow" section
```suggestion
```

> - Long Read Support: Handles both short (Illumina) and long reads (Oxford Nanopore, PacBio) with platform-appropriate tools

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Long Read Support: Handles both short (e.g. Illumina) and long reads (e.g. Oxford Nanopore, PacBio) with platform-appropriate tools
```

> - Decontamination: Removes host (human by default) and phiX contamination using bwa-mem2 (short reads) and minimap2 (long reads)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> - Dual Taxonomic Profiling: Combines rRNA-based (SILVA) and marker gene (mOTUs) approaches

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Multiple taxonomic profiling methods: 1) mOTUs marker-gene approach, 2) rRNA-based (SILVA) appraoch comparable to Amplicon Analysis Pipeline OTU method
```

> - Functional Profiling: Maps reads directly to Pfam-A Hidden Markov Models using HMMER, with optional subsampling for large datasets

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Optional subsampling for functional profiling to limit computational expense
```

> - Automated Database Management: Automatic download and caching of reference databases

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Flexible Database Management: when multiple reference databases are defined in the nextflow params then they are each used thereby generating multiple sets of results.
```

> - Chunking: Efficient processing of large datasets through chunking of reads for cmsearch and hmmsearch steps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Chunking: Efficient processing of large datasets through chunking with empirically tuned resource requirements to match
```
